As we've talked about
regulation is helpful from
the perspective of
a consumer because it
creates safer product markets.
On the other hand,
it discourages innovation
and makes it easier for
incumbents to control
some of these markets.
So in thinking about
this trade-off,
we need to weigh
the enhanced benefit to
consumer safety with
the losses that consumers
suffer from markets
that aren't perfectly functioning
or markets that aren't
sufficiently innovative
as they would
be if they were less
heavily regulated.
There's of course a reason to
think that financial regulation
is different than regulation
of products more generally.
As we've discussed
the losses that come
from financial crises
are large and
widespread and born by
entire communities
and entire countries,
not just by particular
consumers of
one kind of product
that malfunctions, let's say.
The Great Recession provides a
quite a helpful case study
about the nature
of risks that can
emerge in financial markets
and the harm that can be
caused to consumers when
these markets go awry.
The losses of the Great Recession
were large and widespread.
In the US alone,
over eight million Americans
lost their jobs,
eight million American homes
were foreclosed upon,
2.5 million businesses
were closed,
there was a 12 percent decline
in median real family income,
a 40 percent decline in
median real net worth,
and a 4.3 percent
decline in real GDP.
These are substantial
decreases in
the wealth of the United
States as a whole.
But also are born primarily by
actual real American consumers
who lost their jobs
or found their homes
foreclosed upon with
little ability to remedy
the situation and recover
the losses that they had
suffered during the crisis,
in often instances because
of no malfeasance of their own.
In the United States,
the most significant post-crisis
financial reform was the passage
of the Dodd-Frank
Wall Street Reform
and Consumer Protection Act.
Even the name of the Dodd-Frank
Act in and of itself,
illustrates the dual
priorities that regulators
had in the aftermath of
the financial crisis.
The focus certainly
was on creating
a financial sector that
was better functioning,
that was better regulated,
and less likely to
suffer the kind of
systemic collapse that had
occurred and had
been brought about
and exacerbated by the recession.
But simultaneously,
the focus was on
consumer protection
and making sure
that in the future consumers
had better information and
more information about
the kind of risks that were
associated with
their financial products,
and a way by which to voice
their grievances to regulators in
the case that consumers felt that
financial institutions we're
not serving them well.
A very significant reform
following the crisis was in fact
the creation of the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau,
whose entire mandate
is to regulate
these institutions from
the perspective of
consumers to supervise
these institutions
to pass rules and require them to
comply with behaviors that are
going to best serve consumers,
and be sure to read
these markets of unfair,
abusive, and deceptive
acts and practices.
Another significant
reform following
the crisis in the banking sector
in the United States,
was to drastically
increase the amount of
capital banks are
required to hold in
order to engage in
business practices like
lending to small businesses
and lending to consumers.
As a result of
these interventions,
large financial
institutions are today
much better capitalized
than they were before
the crisis and much
better equipped to
whether the next crisis
whenever it will hit.
This is a substantial improvement
relative to the pre-crisis
financial system.
Additionally, we've
created a framework for
regular annual stress-testing of
large banks to make sure that
they're going to be able to hold
sufficient capital to withstand
the next crisis and tailoring
the capital requirements that
they're required to hold to
new risks that emerge in
financial markets
as time progresses.
But importantly, as we've
made substantial improvements on
the regulatory framework for
a traditional financial
institutions,
we've also created incentives
for activity that
used to happen in
this regulated traditional
financial sector
to shift out of
the traditional sector
and instead be initiated by
less regulated shadow
banking entities,
who are able to perform
these services at
much cheaper costs.
A recent paper by Brian Chen,
Sam Hanson and Jeremy Stein,
a former governor of
the Federal Reserve Bank,
note that, to a large extent,
big financial institutions
have gotten out
of the business of
small business lending,
perhaps because of the
increased in regulatory burden
required to be able to
participate in this market.
One of the consequences of
this movement has been that
traditional small
business lending is now
being done by the
less-regulated, nonbank sector.
In fact, these authors
observed that in places
where big banks have
left the business of
small business lending
most substantially.
Peer-to-peer lenders like
Prosper like Lending Club,
have come in to fill
the void that's been
left by these financial
institutions.
The concern is that if
this activity is being driven
out of the traditional
financial sector
and into shadow banks, well,
the traditional financial
sector at least has
some regulatory
framework but as they
exist currently and
as we're going to
talk about over the course
of this series,
it's unclear that
the shadow banking sector has
either a framework or
regulation in place
to ensure the safety and
stability of these markets.